.. _kw_lincs:
.. index::
   single: lincs (keyword in run.in)

:attr:`lincs`
=============

This keyword is used to constrain bond lengths using the LINCS (linear constraint solver) algorithm [Hess1997]_.
With the fastest (bond-stretching) degrees of freedom frozen, a larger time step can be used in molecular dynamics simulations, for example, 1 fs or more for systems containing hydrogen atoms.

The constrained bonds can either be detected automatically from the **initial** structure of a run, using covalent radii [Cordero2008]_, or be read from a constraint file (explicit topology).
For automatic detection, a pair of atoms :math:`i` and :math:`j` is considered bonded when

.. math::

   r_{ij} < f \left( r_i^{\rm cov} + r_j^{\rm cov} \right),

where :math:`f` is the ``factor`` parameter described below.
Unless given explicitly in the constraint file, the target length of each constrained bond is its length in the initial structure.
By default, only bonds involving hydrogen atoms are constrained, which is usually sufficient for increasing the time step.

.. warning::

   This keyword should only be used for **non-reactive** systems where no chemical bond is broken or formed.
   The bond list is determined once at the beginning of a run and is never updated.

Syntax
------
This keyword is used as follows::

  lincs <mode> [order <order>] [iter <iter>] [factor <factor>]

- :attr:`mode` can be:

  - ``H`` (default): only constrain bonds involving hydrogen atoms;
  - ``all``: constrain all bonds detected from the initial structure;
  - ``file <filename>``: read the constraints from the file :attr:`filename` (see below for the format);
  - ``off``: disable bond constraints.

- :attr:`order` is the order of the Neumann series expansion in LINCS, with a default value of 4.
- :attr:`iter` is the number of re-linearization iterations per step, with a default value of 1.
- :attr:`factor` is the factor :math:`f` in the bond detection criterion above, with a default value of 1.25. It is not used with the ``file`` mode.

The constraint file
-------------------
The constraint file uses atom indices starting from 1.
Each non-comment line contains two atom indices and an optional target length in units of Å::

  # atom_i atom_j [target_length_in_A]
  1 43
  2 43 0.96

If :attr:`target_length_in_A` is omitted, the distance between the two atoms in the initial structure is used as the target length.
Lines starting with ``#`` are treated as comments.
The file name is arbitrary.

Examples
--------

Constrain the bonds involving hydrogen atoms with default parameters::

  lincs H

Constrain all the detected bonds, with an expansion order of 6::

  lincs all order 6

Read the constraints from the file ``constraints.in``::

  lincs file constraints.in order 6 iter 2

Caveats
-------

* Each constrained bond removes one degree of freedom, which is properly accounted for in the temperature calculation.
* With constraints, the initial velocities generated by the :ref:`velocity keyword <kw_velocity>` correspond to a slightly higher effective temperature. It is recommended to first equilibrate the system using a thermostat.
* Do not use :ref:`fix <kw_fix>` or :ref:`move <kw_move>` on atoms involved in constraints.
* This keyword cannot be used with path-integral molecular dynamics (:ref:`PIMD <kw_ensemble_pimd>`) or hybrid Monte Carlo (:ref:`mc <kw_mc>`).
* This keyword is propagating: once enabled, it applies to all the subsequent runs, unless ``lincs off`` is specified.
